Oriental Institute
University of Chicago
Chicago 37, Illinois
February 15, 1956

Uppsala Universitet
[?] Professor Torgny Segerstedt
Uppsala, Sweden

Dear Sir:
By letter of December 3, 1955, you honored
me by entrusting me with the function of "special adviser in assess-
sing the work in Assyriology" of two of the applicants for the chair
of Semitic languages, namely Docents Alfred Ossian Haldar and Gustav
Frithiof Rundgren. Herewith I fulfill this highly responsible assign-
ment. I must say in advance, however, that I cannot completely sepa-
rate my judgment of this particular aspect of these candidates from
that of their personality and scholarship as a whole. My judgment is
based, as to Mr. Haldar, on four books, three articles (one of them
unpublished and never meant to be published), and three reviews; as
to Mr. Rundgren, on one book, two published articles, and three un-
published articles which are, however, obviously intended to be pub-
lished.
I do not hesitate to tell you that Mr. Rund-
gren is by far more gifted than Mr. Haldar, although his domain seems
to be limited by comparisen with the broad field commanded by Mr.
Haldar, and although his talents all go in one direction, the so-called
Sprachwissenschaft. As to Mr. Rundgren's "work in Assyriology"
would limit myself to one sentence: he is no Assyriologist and does
not claim to be an Assyriologist. The latter fact gives him a moral
superiority over his competitor, who claims to be an Assyriologist
and is not. Mr. Rundgren uses the Akkadian language many times in
his books and articles, but he only hovers over the grammar as God
did over the waters. He has no intimate knowledge of this language
whatsoever, as he showed especially in his treatment of the Akkadian
t-form. Perhaps his acquaintance with the Ethipoic dialects is a
little better.
It is the claim of the Sprachwissenschaft to
make discoveries, without really understanding any language, by the
so-called comparative method, the only form of thinking of which Mr.
Rundgren disposes. The conviction that it is unnecessary to under-
stand a language in order to make comparisons of this kind is common
to all Sprachwissenschäftler. Mr. Rundgren is very eptimistic about
the prospects of these comparisons, which he bases by preference on
the different dialects of Ethiopic with the inclusion also of what we
termed the Hamito-Cushitic (African) group. I am axtremely doubtful
of the prospects of discovering any truth in this way. As a matter of
fact the conceptions Ur-semitisch and even Ur-semito-hamitisch are
very vague, and remain ill-defined and uninvestigated to this day.

The atomizing of a language by isolating
so-called deictic elements which jump from nouns to verbs, from
prefixes to suffixes, is in my eyes a by-passed stage of linguistics.
Although Mr. Rundgren quotes Trubetskoy twice in his book, he is
still completely addicted to the old Sprachwissenschaft which has no
conception of structure or Gestalt, and uses a simply additive method
to reconstruct older stages of a language in a purely hypothetical
way. The prototypes of Mr. Rundgren are Bauer, Brockelmann, Christian
and his teahher Nyberg. But for the latter two, being philologists
the construvtive Sprachwissenshhaft was only more or less of a hobby
whereas Mr. Rundgren means to have founded a new field of truth-detect-
ion. It is easy to predict that, as Brockelmann changed his basic views
three times during his life, so Mr. Rundgren, having ripened, will also
abandon all these oversophisticated analogies and hypotheses on which
his grammatical and etymological comparisons are based.

At the moment he destroys in his book the
very bases on which all Semiticists agree, namely, the equation of
Ethiopic yenagger with Akkadian ikassad, the parallels found in the
Cushitic Languages for the Akkadian suffix -is and the Akkadian
dative suffix, and the natural and generally accepted derivation of
Akkadian assum from ana sum. For him both ikassad and the Akkadian
dative and -is-suffixes are examples of "innerakkadische Entwicklung", *
while assum is a compound of two or three assumed deictic elements. He
goes so far as to split even Semitic SM (name) into two deictic elements,
entirely ignoring the fact that Sumerian, which has mu-... -šè
corresponding to Akkadian aššum, strictly contradicts his audacious
etymologies.

I can consider all this only as a game without
foundation in reality, which does no harm but is not taken seriously
by anyone. The derivation of Akkadian šumma from a spurious Akkadian
demonstrative element šu + ma, though advanced first by a serious scholar
like Speiser, I cannot rate higher than the examples just quoted. In
this case, paradoxically enough, Mr. Haldar, derided by Mr. Rundgren,
has hit on the truth, namely the equation of Akkadian šumma with Ugaritic
hm, Hebrew 'im, etc. Without denying the great talents and the wonder-
ful mental agility of Mr. Rundgren, I can only pity the students who
will learn from him no more than the usual hypotheses about the so-called
Lautschieberei and neck-breaking etymologies.

As to Mr. Haldar, I have already charged him
with pretending more than he represents by calling himself an Assyrio-
logist. There are three contributions, two published and one unpub-
lished, in which Mr. Haldar has committed himself in our field. One is
the edition of an Old Babylonian letter (Bibliotheca Orientalis X 14);
By checking the accompanying photograph of this tablet, it is easy to
discover more than a dozen elementary misreadings and mistranslations.
The second is an unpublished treatment of some of the easiest Old Baby-
lonian letters and contracts available; whith doubt if any periodical
would publish this - I would not accept it even as a Master's thesis
because of uncounted elementary mistakes. The third is a translation
of the Babylonian Epic of Creation into Swedish. Here Mr. Haldar claims
that, in three cases, he advanced the readings by collations in the
British Museum, readings established by such [?] copyists as
Delitzsch and L. W. King. If we check these passages it is evident
that, in the case of I 36, Delitzsch's reading (el-li-ti[m-ma]); cf.
[el-li-ti]-ma in KAR 317: 4) is to be preferred to Haldar's (ellitamma,
based on BM 45528), while, in the case of Iv 11 and 30, Haldar's
readings, though ingenious, are proved impossible by the new Sultan
Tepe duplicates.

Mr. Haldar never was trained in Assyriology,
otherwise he would have learned this language despite all its diffi-
culties. But the bad thing is not that he does not the langange but
that he pretends to know it, for thereby he threatens the moral basis
of a university. How can he know Akkadian? In his first volume
(Associations of Cult Prophets, p. v) he thanks Professor Widengren
for teaching him-this language, but I wonder whence the latter's com-
petence? Then he spent some time with Mr. Goetze in Yale (see his
"Some Old Babylonian Letters"), but the fruit of his work there we
have already assessed above. Yet his self-confidence goes so far
that he dares to criticise the Akkadian Grammar of W. von Soden, a man
who spent decades of the most penetrating study before he published
this book. It is true that Mr. Haldar, from his very limited knowledge
of Old Babylonian letters, contributed two additions to von Soden, who
is too concise to go into all details. But in criticising him he com-
mitted the most incredible blunders, especially when he tries to teach
von Soden that tabtaqma is a second person singular preterite from
batāqu (Studia Linguistica, p. 128), whereas it is in fact a second person
plural, as is shown beyond any doubt by the other verbs in this letter,
and therefore clearly a perfect from baqāmu. How can anyone feel so
self-confident, being so weak?

But these three contributions made by Mr. Hal-
dar to our field are minor in comparison with the many occasions on
which he has used Akkadian for comparisons. Here he relies totally, as
did Mr. Rundgren for grammar, on second-hand information, and in this
respect the two scholars are the same: good is what fits my theory.
Whether it be an utterance of Bezold's dating from the nineties, a trans-
lation of Witzel or Langdon, or the newest products of the methodical
scholarship of a von Soden or a Falkenstein, all is on the same level.
Quotation is the main instrument, and it is used in the most arbitrary
way. We can only state that Mr. Haldar adds to his quotation his own
analysis of a problem, and is in this respect superior to Mr. Rundgren,
whose approach in these cases is purely "historical". That is, the
latter quotes the most diverse authorities, all the way from Hitzig to
von Soden, and lifts his quotations out of their contexts.

In his own way, however Mr. Haldar is quite
as old-fashioned as Mr. Rundgren and his Sprachwissenschaft. As the
latter's vague reconstructions take no account of modern linguistics
so the foremr's conceptions of history, especially history of culture
are hopelessly outdated. The old pan-Babylonianism of Zimmern, regarded
as dead and superseded by structural analyses and the doctrine of Eigen-
begrifflichkeit, is still quite alive in the school to which Mr. Haldar
adheres. Comparison to him means showing not the [...?],
but only the similarities between - the Semites! [...?] for example, the
concept of me (in Sumerian) and parsu (in Akkadian) is one of the most
perplexing and "eigenbegrifflich" in Assyriology. In his "On the wall
painting from ... Mari", Mr. Haldar makes no effort to study the respective
semantic ranges of these terms, their mutual differences, or their
phenomenology, and he contributes nothing new to their philological
elucidation. And, strange to say, he makes Semites out of the Sumeri-
ans! The craft of hepatescopy or exstispicy fall according to Mr.
Haldar into the sphere of the seers; the Akkadian barū is a priest
belonging to a temple community (Associations of cult prophets among
the ancient Semites, ch. 1). The oldest merchandise is brought forth
once more to make of the Semites a cultural unity, and to peduce to
common denominator the thousands of years old Sumerian culture with
the desert spirit of the Arabs and the original religion of Israel.
It is true, Mr. Haldar belongs to a school and is not the only one
who indulges in comparisons of this kind. But he at least should
have avoided the temptation to use widely diachronic material for es-
tablishing a point. Instead he has fallen squarely inte this trap
throughout his works, even using pre-Sargonic lexical lists (ibid.
p. 45), a class of texts which is prior to and utterly different from
the main tradition of Sumero-Akkadian scholarship, and has up to now
defied all attempts at penetration, together with the more than two
thousand years younger material from Nineveh.

I am extremely sorry not to be able to give
my whole-hearted recommendation to either of the two candidates. To
sum up, Mr. Rundgren has a brilliant but undisciplined mind, isolated
from the latest developments in linguistics; Mr. Haldar has a profound
knowledge of second-hand sources and a very good methodical approach,
but he distorts facts by his devotion to the thoroughly antiquated
pan-Babylonistic and Fraserian schools. Mr. Haldar is not unworthy to
receive this chair in a university with an old tradition of scientific
solidity, but only on the condition that he absolutely renounce his
claim to be an Assyriologist. Otherwise you would be appointing a
quack pretending to be a doctor.

With that I have carried out your commission
to the best of my knowledge and conscience. If any further questions
should arise, I am ready to answer them in order to help both your
University and my discipline.

Very faithfully yours,

B. Landsberger

*He even teaches Poebel Sumerian in order to get rid of Akkadian -iš.